README.md, before:

# AI-Driven Company Intelligence System

A comprehensive Python-based tool for analyzing company-level data to generate actionable insights through data-driven segmentation and machine learning.

## Overview

This system transforms raw company attributes (industry classifications, company size, ownership structure, geographic footprint, operational indicators) into interpretable company intelligence. It enables:

- **Company Segmentation**: Identify and group companies with similar characteristics
- **Pattern Analysis**: Discover key differences, similarities, and anomalies
- **Business Insights**: Generate data-grounded explanations for decision-making
- **Visualization**: Interactive and static visualizations of segmentation results

## Features

1. **Data Preprocessing**
   - Handles missing values
   - Encodes categorical variables
   - Scales numeric features
   - Feature selection and engineering

2. **Clustering & Segmentation**
   - Automatic optimal cluster determination (elbow method + silhouette score)
   - K-Means clustering
   - DBSCAN clustering (optional)
   - PCA for dimensionality reduction

3. **Machine Learning Models**
   - **Logistic Regression**: Predict cluster membership from company features
   - **TF-IDF Vectorization**: Extract features from text descriptions (if available)
   - **Chi-Square Test**: Test associations between categorical variables and clusters
   - **Dimensionality Reduction**: Multiple methods including:
     - PCA (Principal Component Analysis)
     - TruncatedSVD (Singular Value Decomposition)
     - t-SNE (t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding) - optional
     - UMAP (Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection) - optional

4. **Analysis Capabilities**
   - Cluster characterization
   - Cross-cluster comparison
   - Outlier detection
   - Pattern identification
   - Correlation analysis
   - Statistical significance testing (Chi-square)
   - Model accuracy assessment

5. **LLM-Powered Insights** (Optional)
   - Generates interpretable, business-friendly insights
   - Uses OpenAI GPT-4 for natural language explanations
   - Falls back to rule-based insights if LLM unavailable

6. **Visualization**
   - Cluster distribution charts
   - PCA 2D/3D visualizations
   - TruncatedSVD visualizations
   - Feature comparison boxplots
   - Interactive Plotly visualizations
   - Dimensionality reduction comparisons

7. **Reporting**
   - Comprehensive text reports
   - CSV exports with cluster labels
   - Multiple visualization formats
   - Model performance metrics

## Installation

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.8 or higher
- pip package manager

### Setup

1. **Clone or navigate to the project directory**

2. **Create a virtual environment (recommended)**
   ```bash
   python3 -m venv venv
   source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate
   ```

3. **Install required packages**
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

4. **Optional: Set up OpenAI API key for LLM insights**
   - Create a `.env` file in the project directory
   - Add: `OPENAI_API_KEY=your_api_key_here`
   - Or set environment variable: `export OPENAI_API_KEY=your_api_key_here`

## Usage

### Basic Usage

Run the analysis on your data file:

```bash
python company_intelligence.py
```

This will use `champions_group_data.xlsx` by default.

### Custom Data File

```bash
python company_intelligence.py path/to/your/data.xlsx
```

Or for CSV files:

```bash
python company_intelligence.py path/to/your/data.csv
```

### Programmatic Usage

```python
from company_intelligence import CompanyIntelligence

# Initialize analyzer
analyzer = CompanyIntelligence(
    data_path='champions_group_data.xlsx',
    api_key='your_openai_api_key'  # Optional
)

# Run full analysis
results = analyzer.run_full_analysis(n_clusters=5)  # Optional: specify cluster count

# Access results
cluster_analysis = results['cluster_analysis']
patterns = results['patterns']
insights = results['insights']
```

### Custom Analysis Steps

```python
from company_intelligence import CompanyIntelligence

analyzer = CompanyIntelligence('champions_group_data.xlsx')

# Step 1: Explore data
analyzer.explore_data()

# Step 2: Preprocess (exclude specific columns if needed)
analyzer.preprocess_data(exclude_cols=['Company_ID', 'Notes'])

# Step 3: Determine optimal clusters
optimal_k = analyzer.determine_optimal_clusters(max_k=10)

# Step 4: Perform clustering
analyzer.perform_clustering(n_clusters=optimal_k)

# Step 5: Analyze clusters
cluster_analysis = analyzer.analyze_clusters()

# Step 6: Compare clusters
comparison = analyzer.compare_clusters()

# Step 7: Identify patterns
patterns = analyzer.identify_patterns()

# Step 8: Generate insights
insights = analyzer.generate_llm_insights(cluster_analysis, patterns)

# Step 9: Create visualizations
analyzer.visualize_results()

# Step 10: Generate report
report = analyzer.generate_report(cluster_analysis, patterns, insights)
```

## Output Files

After running the analysis, the following files will be generated:

1. **company_intelligence_report.txt** - Comprehensive text report with insights
2. **companies_with_segments.csv** - Original data with cluster labels added
3. **cluster_distribution.png** - Bar chart showing company distribution across segments
4. **pca_clusters.png** - 2D PCA visualization of clusters
5. **feature_comparison.png** - Boxplots comparing features across clusters
6. **interactive_clusters.html** - Interactive 3D visualization (open in browser)
7. **optimal_clusters.png** - Elbow curve and silhouette scores for cluster selection

## Data Format

The system expects data in Excel (.xlsx, .xls) or CSV format with:

- **Numeric columns**: For quantitative analysis (e.g., revenue, employee count, age)
- **Categorical columns**: For qualitative analysis (e.g., industry, country, ownership type)
- **Company identifiers**: Optional, can be excluded from analysis

### Example Data Structure

| Company_ID | Industry | Revenue | Employees | Country | ... |
|------------|----------|---------|-----------|---------|-----|
| 1          | Tech     | 1000000 | 500       | USA     | ... |
| 2          | Finance  | 5000000 | 2000      | UK      | ... |

## Configuration

### Excluding Columns

If certain columns should not be used in clustering (e.g., IDs, notes):

```python
analyzer.preprocess_data(exclude_cols=['Company_ID', 'Notes', 'Internal_Code'])
```

### Specifying Cluster Count

```python
# Let system determine optimal (recommended)
analyzer.perform_clustering()

# Or specify manually
analyzer.perform_clustering(n_clusters=5)
```

### Using Different Clustering Methods

```python
# K-Means (default)
analyzer.perform_clustering(method='kmeans')

# DBSCAN (density-based)
analyzer.perform_clustering(method='dbscan')
```

## Commercial Applications

This system demonstrates the commercial value of company data through:

1. **Sales Intelligence**
   - Segment prospects by characteristics
   - Prioritize high-value segments
   - Understand customer profiles

2. **Risk Assessment**
   - Identify risk patterns by segment
   - Detect anomalies and outliers
   - Benchmark against similar companies

3. **Market Research**
   - Understand industry structure
   - Identify market segments
   - Analyze competitive landscape

4. **Strategic Planning**
   - Identify growth opportunities
   - Understand operational differences
   - Support M&A analysis

## Technical Details

### Algorithms Used

- **Clustering**: K-Means, DBSCAN
- **Dimensionality Reduction**: Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
- **Feature Scaling**: StandardScaler (z-score normalization)
- **Encoding**: Label Encoding for categorical variables

### Performance Considerations

- Handles datasets with thousands of companies
- Automatically handles missing values
- Efficient preprocessing pipeline
- Optimized for typical firmographic datasets

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

1. **ModuleNotFoundError**: Install missing packages with `pip install -r requirements.txt`

2. **Memory Issues with Large Datasets**: 
   - Reduce number of features
   - Use sampling for initial exploration
   - Increase system memory

3. **LLM Insights Not Working**:
   - Check API key is set correctly
   - Verify internet connection
   - System will fall back to rule-based insights automatically

4. **Poor Clustering Results**:
   - Review data quality
   - Try different number of clusters
   - Exclude irrelevant columns
   - Check for data normalization issues

## License

This project is provided as-is for the Datathon 2026 competition.

## Contact & Support

For questions or issues, please refer to the project documentation or contact the development team.

Commit message:

Update README with DeepSeek API documentation

README.md, after:

# AI-Driven Company Intelligence System

A comprehensive Python-based tool for analyzing company-level data to generate actionable insights through data-driven segmentation and machine learning.

## Overview

This system transforms raw company attributes (industry classifications, company size, ownership structure, geographic footprint, operational indicators) into interpretable company intelligence. It enables:

- **Company Segmentation**: Identify and group companies with similar characteristics
- **Pattern Analysis**: Discover key differences, similarities, and anomalies
- **Business Insights**: Generate data-grounded explanations for decision-making
- **Visualization**: Interactive and static visualizations of segmentation results

## Features

1. **Data Preprocessing**
   - Handles missing values
   - Encodes categorical variables
   - Scales numeric features
   - Feature selection and engineering

2. **Clustering & Segmentation**
   - Automatic optimal cluster determination (elbow method + silhouette score)
   - K-Means clustering
   - DBSCAN clustering (optional)
   - PCA for dimensionality reduction

3. **Machine Learning Models**
   - **Logistic Regression**: Predict cluster membership from company features
   - **TF-IDF Vectorization**: Extract features from text descriptions (if available)
   - **Chi-Square Test**: Test associations between categorical variables and clusters
   - **Dimensionality Reduction**: Multiple methods including:
     - PCA (Principal Component Analysis)
     - TruncatedSVD (Singular Value Decomposition)
     - t-SNE (t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding) - optional
     - UMAP (Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection) - optional

4. **Analysis Capabilities**
   - Cluster characterization
   - Cross-cluster comparison
   - Outlier detection
   - Pattern identification
   - Correlation analysis
   - Statistical significance testing (Chi-square)
   - Model accuracy assessment

5. **LLM-Powered Insights** (Optional)
   - Generates interpretable, business-friendly insights
   - Uses OpenAI GPT-4 for natural language explanations
   - Falls back to rule-based insights if LLM unavailable

6. **Visualization**
   - Cluster distribution charts
   - PCA 2D/3D visualizations
   - TruncatedSVD visualizations
   - Feature comparison boxplots
   - Interactive Plotly visualizations
   - Dimensionality reduction comparisons

7. **Reporting**
   - Comprehensive text reports
   - CSV exports with cluster labels
   - Multiple visualization formats
   - Model performance metrics

## Installation

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.8 or higher
- pip package manager

### Setup

1. **Clone or navigate to the project directory**

2. **Create a virtual environment (recommended)**
   ```bash
   python3 -m venv venv
   source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate
   ```

3. **Install required packages**
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

4. **Optional: Set up API key for LLM insights (OpenAI or DeepSeek)**
   - Create a `.env` file in the project directory
   - For DeepSeek: `DEEPSEEK_API_KEY=your_deepseek_api_key_here`
   - For OpenAI: `OPENAI_API_KEY=your_openai_api_key_here`
   - Or set environment variable:
     - `export DEEPSEEK_API_KEY=your_key_here` (DeepSeek)
     - `export OPENAI_API_KEY=your_key_here` (OpenAI)
   - The system will try DeepSeek first, then fall back to OpenAI

## Usage

### Basic Usage

Run the analysis on your data file:

```bash
python company_intelligence.py
```

This will use `champions_group_data.xlsx` by default.

### Custom Data File

```bash
python company_intelligence.py path/to/your/data.xlsx
```

Or for CSV files:

```bash
python company_intelligence.py path/to/your/data.csv
```

### Programmatic Usage

```python
from company_intelligence import CompanyIntelligence

# Initialize analyzer
analyzer = CompanyIntelligence(
    data_path='champions_group_data.xlsx',
    api_key='your_openai_api_key'  # Optional
)

# Run full analysis
results = analyzer.run_full_analysis(n_clusters=5)  # Optional: specify cluster count

# Access results
cluster_analysis = results['cluster_analysis']
patterns = results['patterns']
insights = results['insights']
```

### Custom Analysis Steps

```python
from company_intelligence import CompanyIntelligence

analyzer = CompanyIntelligence('champions_group_data.xlsx')

# Step 1: Explore data
analyzer.explore_data()

# Step 2: Preprocess (exclude specific columns if needed)
analyzer.preprocess_data(exclude_cols=['Company_ID', 'Notes'])

# Step 3: Determine optimal clusters
optimal_k = analyzer.determine_optimal_clusters(max_k=10)

# Step 4: Perform clustering
analyzer.perform_clustering(n_clusters=optimal_k)

# Step 5: Analyze clusters
cluster_analysis = analyzer.analyze_clusters()

# Step 6: Compare clusters
comparison = analyzer.compare_clusters()

# Step 7: Identify patterns
patterns = analyzer.identify_patterns()

# Step 8: Generate insights
insights = analyzer.generate_llm_insights(cluster_analysis, patterns)

# Step 9: Create visualizations
analyzer.visualize_results()

# Step 10: Generate report
report = analyzer.generate_report(cluster_analysis, patterns, insights)
```

## Output Files

After running the analysis, the following files will be generated:

1. **company_intelligence_report.txt** - Comprehensive text report with insights
2. **companies_with_segments.csv** - Original data with cluster labels added
3. **cluster_distribution.png** - Bar chart showing company distribution across segments
4. **pca_clusters.png** - 2D PCA visualization of clusters
5. **feature_comparison.png** - Boxplots comparing features across clusters
6. **interactive_clusters.html** - Interactive 3D visualization (open in browser)
7. **optimal_clusters.png** - Elbow curve and silhouette scores for cluster selection

## Data Format

The system expects data in Excel (.xlsx, .xls) or CSV format with:

- **Numeric columns**: For quantitative analysis (e.g., revenue, employee count, age)
- **Categorical columns**: For qualitative analysis (e.g., industry, country, ownership type)
- **Company identifiers**: Optional, can be excluded from analysis

### Example Data Structure

| Company_ID | Industry | Revenue | Employees | Country | ... |
|------------|----------|---------|-----------|---------|-----|
| 1          | Tech     | 1000000 | 500       | USA     | ... |
| 2          | Finance  | 5000000 | 2000      | UK      | ... |

## Configuration

### Excluding Columns

If certain columns should not be used in clustering (e.g., IDs, notes):

```python
analyzer.preprocess_data(exclude_cols=['Company_ID', 'Notes', 'Internal_Code'])
```

### Specifying Cluster Count

```python
# Let system determine optimal (recommended)
analyzer.perform_clustering()

# Or specify manually
analyzer.perform_clustering(n_clusters=5)
```

### Using Different Clustering Methods

```python
# K-Means (default)
analyzer.perform_clustering(method='kmeans')

# DBSCAN (density-based)
analyzer.perform_clustering(method='dbscan')
```

## Commercial Applications

This system demonstrates the commercial value of company data through:

1. **Sales Intelligence**
   - Segment prospects by characteristics
   - Prioritize high-value segments
   - Understand customer profiles

2. **Risk Assessment**
   - Identify risk patterns by segment
   - Detect anomalies and outliers
   - Benchmark against similar companies

3. **Market Research**
   - Understand industry structure
   - Identify market segments
   - Analyze competitive landscape

4. **Strategic Planning**
   - Identify growth opportunities
   - Understand operational differences
   - Support M&A analysis

## Technical Details

### Algorithms Used

- **Clustering**: K-Means, DBSCAN
- **Dimensionality Reduction**: Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
- **Feature Scaling**: StandardScaler (z-score normalization)
- **Encoding**: Label Encoding for categorical variables

### Performance Considerations

- Handles datasets with thousands of companies
- Automatically handles missing values
- Efficient preprocessing pipeline
- Optimized for typical firmographic datasets

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

1. **ModuleNotFoundError**: Install missing packages with `pip install -r requirements.txt`

2. **Memory Issues with Large Datasets**: 
   - Reduce number of features
   - Use sampling for initial exploration
   - Increase system memory

3. **LLM Insights Not Working**:
   - Check API key is set correctly
   - Verify internet connection
   - System will fall back to rule-based insights automatically

4. **Poor Clustering Results**:
   - Review data quality
   - Try different number of clusters
   - Exclude irrelevant columns
   - Check for data normalization issues

## License

This project is provided as-is for the Datathon 2026 competition.

## Contact & Support

For questions or issues, please refer to the project documentation or contact the development team.
